Abstract
--------

One advantage of digital transformation is the easier and faster communication which is further intensified by the social media platforms such as Facebook. However, a problem comes with this as people become complacent with the information they read, post, and share without further counterchecking and research. Intensifying the problem further are persona and organizations who share misleading information that best serves their own affairs and partisanship. In this study, we had worked on an algorithm that processes news articles gathered both from Facebook and news media sites’ respective RSS feeds as input to check its reliability. The algorithm uses topic generation and sentiment analysis of news articles. Once the news articles are generated with topic and sentiments, it was inputted in the reliability classifier where it was tested against a given threshold value we flagged as the standard value of reliability. From the results of the methodology performed, it can be concluded that news articles scraped from Manila Bulletin, GMA, Philstar, Rappler, and CNN Philippines had a positive statistical mean and positive/neutral statistical mode with regards to the sentiment rating. Also, the news articles we got from the Facebook account Thinking Pinoy, an entity known for its strong statements against some political figures in the country, were classified as unreliable using our algorithm. While our algorithm provides a quantitative rating to check the reliability of a certain article, there are still some factors that need yet to be be considered in order to provide a more accurate and unbiased reliability rating.
